---
layout: post
category : blog
tags : [Machine Learning, Neural Nets, RNN, Donald Trump]
title: "TrumpRNN, or How I taught a Neural Net to be repulsive"
comments: on
languages: en
---

It's hard not to have an opinion on Donald Trump. The man attracts very strong opinions on both side: people seem to find him either amazing for speaking his mind, or repulsive for being a fascist.

I think that this is the exact opposite of the perception of machines (or bots) with the general public: they are cold, indifferent machines that are just doing what they were supposed to. With this tiny project, I thought I'd play a game and see if I can get enough people to hate a bot :)

# The task

The task is very simple: create a "Donald Trump language model", i.e. a bot that has been trained exclusively on what Donald Trump has said in speeches and/or interviews this last year, and... Well, just let him speak his "mind" and post a selection of the funniest quotes.

# The technology

The algorithm that I chose to use for this task are Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs). A short, Wikipedia-like description is that they are neural networks that allow loops in their hidden layers (in practice though the loop is "unrolled" for up to a pre-defined number that is usually fairly large). They are a generative model (meaning that it defines a distribution from which you can sample) and can thus be used to create a language model. What used to be the state of the art when I was still in school[^im-old] were Hidden Markov Models (HMMs). That "Markov" in the name means that the state of the system at each step depends _only_ on the state of the system at the previous step. 

Andrej Karpathy goes into some detail as of why [here](http://karpathy.github.io/2015/05/21/rnn-effectiveness/).






Recurrent Neural Networks are among the most popular models in this "Deep Learning revolution". They enable modeling a sequence, and they have found a variety of application in industry already. 

One of the applications that are really easy to implement and play with are language models. 

Having lived in the US for a while, I have started following the political scene (while gradually losing interest for the one in my country of birth, Italy). I find one candidate to be the most *interesting*, especially to an European like


[^im-old]: This reminds me I'm getting old :/